<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V: Evening</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Evening</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“Aw, aim for th’ Tump, measter; aim for th’ Tump,” said the carter, slanting his whip to indicate the direction. “When you gets thur, look’ee, go for th’ Cas’l; and when you gets thur, go athwert the Vuzz toward th’ Virs; and when you gets drough thaay, thur be Akkern Chace, and a lane as goes down to Warren. Tchek! Woaght!”</p>
			<p>At the foot of the Downs, along whose base the highway road wound, Geoffrey had paused to take counsel of a carter, who had just descended with a load of flints, before venturing across the all-but-trackless hills. The man very civilly stopped his wagon and named the various landmarks by which he would have guided his own course to Andrew Fisher’s. Geoffrey had started early in the evening, intending to go all the way to Warren House, for he carried with him the rug (strapped to the saddle) which Margaret and May had forgotten, and for which the rude old man had written. This rug, which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Estcourt gave him, was in fact his passport, for he scarcely knew how Margaret would take his coming to fetch her in that rather abrupt way. Guessing what the man meant more by the slant of his whip than his words, he turned off the road on to the sward, and ascended the hill.</p>
			<p>A long narrow shadow of man and horse, disproportionately stretched out, raced before him along the slope. The hoofs of the grey hardly cut the firm turf, dry with summer heat; the vivid green of spring had already gone, and a faint brown was just visible somewhere in the grass. Dark boulder stones⁠—sarsens⁠—bald and smooth, thrust their shoulders out of the sward here and there; hollowed out into curious cuplike cavities, in which, after a shower, the collected raindrops remained imprisoned in tiny bowls hard as the fabled adamant of medieval story. Round white bosses⁠—white as milk, and globular like cannon-shot⁠—dotted the turf, fungi not yet ripened into the dust of the puffball. Now and again the iron shoes dashed an edible mushroom to pieces, turning the pink gills upwards to shrivel and blacken in the morrow’s sun. The bees rose with a shrill buzz from the white clover, which is the shepherd’s sign of midsummer. Swiftly the grey sped along the slopes, the shadow racing before grew longer and fainter as the beams of the sun came nearly horizontally. Already the ridges cast a shadow into the hollows⁠—into the narrow coombes, where great flints and chalk fragments had rolled down and strewed the ground as with the wreck of a titanic skirmish. Thickets of green furze tipped with yellow bloom, and beneath, peeping out, the pale purple heath-flower. On the stunted hawthorn bushes standing alone, stern sentinels in summer’s heat and winter’s storm, green peggles hardening, which autumn would redden and ripen for the thrush. Odorous thyme and yellowbird’s-foot lotus embroidering the grassy carpet; wide breadths of tussocky grass, tall and tough, which the sheep had left untouched, and where the hare crouched in her form, hearkening to the thud of the hoofs.</p>
			<p>On past the steep wall of an ancient chalk-quarry, spotted with red streaks and stains as of rusty iron, where the ploughboys search for pyrites, and call them thunderbolts and “gold,” for when broken the radial metallic fibres glisten yellow. Past a field of oats, rising hardly a foot high in the barren soil⁠—in the corner an upturned plough with rusty share and wooden handles painted red. Down below in the plains between the hills squares of drooping barley and bold upstanding wheat, whose tender green the sun had invaded with advancing hues of gold. Over all the brooding silence of the summer eve, one brown lark alone singing in the air above the plain, far away from the distant ridge the faint tinkle of a sheep-bell. Now the sun was down the lower eastern atmosphere thickened with a dull red; the shepherds discerned the face of the sky, and said tomorrow would be fine.</p>
			<p>Up the steep side of the “Tump” at last, slackening speed perforce, and checking the grey on the summit. It was a great round hill, detached, and somewhat like a huge bowl inverted, with a small circular level space, on what at a distance seemed an almost pointed apex, a space bare of aught but close-cropped herbage. Westwards was the dim vale, a faint mist blotting out steeple and tower⁠—a mist blending with the sky at the horizon, and there all aglow. Eastwards, ridge upon ridge, hill after hill, with spurs running out into the narrow plains between, and deep coombes. He gazed earnestly over these, looking for signs and landmarks, but found none. The rough trail was lost⁠—the hoof marks cut in the winter when the earth was soft were filled up by the swelling turf, and covered over with thyme. Those who laboured by day in the plains, weeding the fields, were gone down to their homes in the hamlets hidden in the valleys. At a venture he struck direct for the east, anxious to lose no time; for he began to fear he should miss Margaret, and soon afterwards luckily crossed the path of a shepherd-lad, whistling as he and his shaggy dog wended for “whoam.”</p>
			<p>“Which is the way to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fisher’s?” asked Geoffrey.</p>
			<p>“Thaay be goin’ into th’ Mash tomorrow,” answered the boy, whose thoughts were differently engaged.</p>
			<p>“Tell me the way to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fisher’s⁠—the Warren.”</p>
			<p>“We be got shart o’ keep; wants zum rain, doan’t ’ee zee?”</p>
			<p>“Can’t you answer a question?”</p>
			<p>“Thur’s a main sight o’ tackle in the Mash vor um.”</p>
			<p>He was so used to being stopped and asked about his sheep that he took it for granted Geoffrey was putting the same accustomed interrogatories. Every farmer cross-examines his neighbour’s shepherd when he meets him. The “Mash” was doubtless a meadow reclaimed from a marsh. “Land be terrable dry, zur.”</p>
			<p>“Will you listen to me?” angrily. “Where’s the Warren?”</p>
			<p>“Aw, mebbe you means ould Fisher’s?”</p>
			<p>“I mean <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fisher’s.”</p>
			<p>“A’ be auver thur,” pointing northeast.</p>
			<p>“How far?”</p>
			<p>“Aw, it be a akkerd road,” doubtfully, as he looked Geoffrey up and down, and it dawned on him slowly that it was a stranger.</p>
			<p>“I’ll give you a quart if you will show me.”</p>
			<p>“Wull ee? Come on.” The beer went at once right to the nervous centre and awoke all his faculties. He led Geoffrey across the plain and up a swelling shoulder of down, on whose ridge was a broad deep fosse and green rampart.</p>
			<p>“This be th’ Cas’l,” said the guide, meaning entrenchments⁠—earthworks are called “castles.” In one spot the fosse was partly filled up, and an opening cut in the rampart, by which he rode through and found the “castle,” a vast earthwork of unknown antiquity.</p>
			<p>“Mind thaay vlint-pits,” said the boy.</p>
			<p>The flint-diggers had been at work here long ago⁠—deep gullies and holes encumbered the way, half-hidden with thistles and furze. The place was honeycombed; it reminded Geoffrey of the Australian gold-diggings. He threaded his way slowly between these, and presently emerged on the slope beyond the “castle.”</p>
			<p>“Now which way is it?” he asked, glancing doubtfully at the hills still rolling away in unbroken succession.</p>
			<p>“Yellucks,” said the boy, meaning “Look here,” and he pointed at a dark object on a distant ridge, which Geoffrey made out to be a copse. “Thur’s Moonlight Virs.”</p>
			<p>“Well, and when I get to Moonlight Firs, which way then?”</p>
			<p>“Thee foller th’ ruts⁠—thaay’ll take ee to Akkern Chace.”</p>
			<p>“The ruts?”</p>
			<p>“Eez, th’ wagon ruts; thaay goes drough Akkern Chace down to Warren. Be you afeared?” seeing Geoffrey hesitated. “Thaay’ll lead ee drough th’ wood; it be main dark under th’ pollard oaks:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Akkern Chace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be a unkid place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When th’ moon do show hur face.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Wur be my quart?”</p>
			<p>Geoffrey gave him sixpence; he touched his forelock, called his dog, and whistled down the hill. Geoffrey pushed on as rapidly as his horse, now a little weary, would go for the firs. In half an hour he reached it, and found a wagon track which, as the boy had said, after a while led him into a wood⁠—scattered pollard oaks, hawthorn bushes, and fir plantations. Now two fresh difficulties arose: the grey first limped and then went lame; and the question began to arise, Would Margaret after all come this way? In the gathering twilight, might she not take the circuitous, but safer, highway? She might even have already passed. By this time he was well into the wood⁠—it consisted of firs there. The grey went so lame he resolved to go no farther, but to wait. He dismounted, threw himself at length upon the grass beside the green track, and the grey immediately applied himself to grazing with steady contentment.</p>
			<p>The tall green trees shut out all but a narrow lane of sky, azure, but darkening; not the faintest breath of moving air relieved the sultry brooding heat of the summer twilight. From the firs came a fragrance, filling the atmosphere with a sweet resinous odour. The sap exuding through the bark formed in white viscous drops upon the trunks. Indolently reclining, half drowsy in the heat, he could see deep into the wood, along on the level ground between the stems, for the fallen “needles” checked vegetation. A squirrel gambolled hither and thither in this hollow space; with darting rapid movements it came towards him, and then suddenly shot up a fir and was instantly out of sight among the thick foliage. In the stillness he could hear the tearing of the fibres of grass as the grey fed near. A hare came stealing up the track, with the peculiar shuffling, cunning gait they have when rambling as they deem unwatched. Limping slowly, “Wat” stayed to choose titbits among the grass⁠—so near that when an insect tickled him and he shook his head Geoffrey heard the tips of his ears flap together. Daintily he pushed his nose among the tussocks, then craned his neck and looked into the thickets. Where the track turned at the bend the shadows crept out, toning down the twilight with mystic uncertainty.</p>
			<p>Suddenly the hare rose, elevated his ears⁠—Geoffrey could see the nostrils working⁠—and then, with one thrust as it were of his lean flanks, flung himself into the wood. The grey ceased feeding, raised his head, and listened. In a few moments came the slow thud of hoofs walking. From behind the bushes Geoffrey watched the bend of the track. Then the sweet voice he knew so well floated towards him. Margaret was singing, little thinking anyone was near:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“And as she went along the highroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weather being hot and dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sat her down upon a green bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her true love came riding by.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Her chestnut whinnied, seeing the other horse on turning the corner.</p>
			<p>“Margaret!”</p>
			<p>“Sir!” blushing, and resentful that he should have surprised her. She had been thinking of him. She felt as though he had caught her and discovered her secret. She instantly took refuge in hauteur.</p>
			<p>“I came to meet you.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” extremely coldly; she was passing on.</p>
			<p>“You do not mind?” he took hold of her bridle.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Newton!” angrily. Her countenance became suffused with a burning red. He felt he had blundered.</p>
			<p>“At least you will let me ride back with you,” he said humbly, dropping the bridle.</p>
			<p>She immediately struck the chestnut⁠—the mare sprang forward and cantered down the lane. Quite beside himself, half with annoyance with her, half with himself, he ran to the grey, mounted, and tried to follow. But the horse was lame. He did his best, limped, stumbled, recovered himself, and shambled after painfully. When Geoffrey reached the edge of the wood, Margaret, a long distance ahead, was riding out upon the Downs⁠—horse and horsewoman a dark figure, indistinct in the gloaming. Fearful of losing her, he called on the grey; but she glided away from him swiftly over the darkening plain and up the opposite hill. For a moment he saw her clear against the skyline, then she was over the ridge and gone.</p>
			<p>He thrashed the grey, and forced him rather than rode him up the hill, but there the long-suffering animal stayed his wretched shamble and walked. Wild with anger, Geoffrey dismounted, ran to the edge of the hill, and looked for Margaret.</p>
			<p>Deep in the wide hollow lay a white mist, covering all things with its cloak. Beyond was a black mass, with undulating ridge against the sky. “The chestnut <em>must</em> walk up that,” he thought; and, without a moment’s pause, dropped his whip, and raced down the slope headlong. What he should say or do if he overtook her he did not stay to think; but overtake her he would. His long stride carried him quickly to the bottom. He imagined he should find a thick fog there as it had looked from above; but now that he was in it there was nothing more than an impalpable mist, through which he could see for some distance. But upwards the mist thickened, and the hill above was hidden now.</p>
			<p>He listened⁠—not a sound; then rushed across the level, and threw himself against the next ascent. Panting, he reached the summit; it was but a narrow ridge, and over it another coombe. Instead of a sea of mist here, one long streak, like a cloud, hung midway. No horse visible. Again he dashed forward, and passed through the stratum of mist-cloud as he went down, and the second time as he climbed the opposite rise⁠—more slowly, for these Downs pull hard against the strongest chest. Then there was a gradually rising plateau⁠—dusky, dotted with ghostly hawthorn bushes, but nothing moving that his straining eyes could discern.</p>
			<p>But as he stood, and his labouring heart beat loudly, there came the faint sound of iron-shod hoofs that clicked upon stray flints, far away to the right. Like an arrow he rushed there⁠—unthinking, and therefore baffled. For instead of crossing the steep ridges, she had ridden round on the slope; and he, running on the chord of the arc, had not only caught her up, but got some distance in front. If he had remained where he was, she would have passed close by him. But running thus to the right in his wild haste, he lost great part of his advantage. Suddenly he stopped short, and saw in the dim light a shadowy figure stretching swiftly into the mist.</p>
			<p>“Margaret!” he called, involuntarily. The earth-cloud of mist closed round her, and the shadowy figure faded away. On he went again, stumbling in the ruts left by wheels in winter, nearly thrown by the tough heath, and the crooked furze stems holding his foot, and fast losing his wind. He struggled up the slope, and finally, perforce, came to a striding walk. Suddenly he stopped⁠—a low neigh floated in the stillness up from a vale on his left. Her path turned there, then; he would cut across the angle. But, taught by experience, he paused at the edge of the descent, and listened before going down. In a minute or two another faint clicking of flints sounded behind him. “By Jove, I begin to think⁠—aha!” The flints clicked in the stillness away on his right. Then after a brief while a dark indistinct object crossed in front of him. “All round me,” said Geoffrey, aloud. “I understand.” He bounded forward, refreshed by his short pause. In three minutes the dark object resolved itself into the chestnut, standing still now on the verge of a gloomy hollow.</p>
			<p>Then, close upon his quarry, the hunter slackened speed. It was his turn now; he strolled slowly, halted, even turned his back upon her, and looked up at the sky. The stars were shining; till that moment he had not realised that it was night. By-and-by he went nearer.</p>
			<p>“Geoffrey!” she called, faintly. No reply.</p>
			<p>“Geoffrey!”⁠—louder⁠—“is that you?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, dear.” The first time he had used the word to her.</p>
			<p>“Do come to me!” in a tone of distress. He ran eagerly to her side.</p>
			<p>“It is dark,” she said, in a low voice, “and⁠—and I have lost the way.”</p>
			<p>“I thought you had; you rode all round me.”</p>
			<p>“Did I? O, then I am lost, indeed; that is what people always do when they are lost on the hills⁠—they go round and round in a circle. Where is your horse?”</p>
			<p>“I left him lame, a long way behind.”</p>
			<p>“How unfortunate! And ‘Kitty’ ”⁠—stroking the mare’s neck⁠—“is weary too. But perhaps you know the way⁠—try and look.”</p>
			<p>He did look round to please her, but with little hope. It was not indeed dark⁠—unless there are clouds, the nights of summer are not dark⁠—but the dimness that results from uncertain definition was equally bewildering. The vales were full of white mist; the plains visible near at hand grew vague as the eye tried to trace a way across. The hills, just where the ridges rose high, could be seen against the sky, but the ranges mingled and the dark slopes faded far away into the mist. Each looked alike⁠—there was no commanding feature to fix the vision; hills after hills, grey shadowy plains, dusky coombes and valleys, dimly seen at hand and shapeless in the distance. Then he stooped and searched in vain for continuous ruts or hoof marks or any sign of track. She watched him earnestly.</p>
			<p>“It is difficult to make out,” he said. “You know I am a stranger to these Downs.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes; what shall we do? I shall not reach Greene Ferne tonight.”</p>
			<p>“I will try very hard,” he said, venturing to take her hand. But in his heart he was doubtful.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
